[Music]
well we're going to continue our
discussion of the big five traits today
and I'm going to talk to you about
openness and
intelligence um roughly speaking so the
first thing I want to do is put them
into context you need to understand
where in Ence fits in the in the trait
hierarchy structure and so we've we've
looked at this before but you can break
the big five into the big
two plasticity and stability we'll start
with stability here and stable people
are conscientious high in stress
tolerance or emotional stability or low
in neuroticism depending on how you look
at it and high in
agreeableness and then conscientiousness
breaks down into industrious and
orderliness um neuroticism breaks down
into volatility and withdrawal and
agreeableness breaks down into
politeness and
compassion and then for the second major
trait you have the the big two trait you
have plasticity and plasticity is made
up of extraversion and openness and
those look like the reason they Clump
together the reason the first three
Clump together we think is because
they're roughly associated with
serotonergic function um and the reason
that latter two Clump together is
because they're roughly associated with
dopaminergic function and the dopamine
system mediates exploratory behavior in
the face of the unknown but it also
mediates positive emotion and and it's
because in order to move forward into
the
unknown it isn't that you have to
experience positive emotion it's that
the emotion you experience when you're
motivated to move forward into the
unknown and explore is a positive
emotion and positive emotion is very
much also associated with interaction in
the social environment and maybe that's
because a tremendous amount of what
you're doing in the social environment
is essentially exploratory Behavior
right because for example when you're
communicating with people that's
primarily exploratory behavior um so
it's not surprising that the circuitry
overlaps in in that manner um openness
is the one we're going to concentrate on
most particularly today and it it's
openness to experience technically and
it seems to break down into intellect
and and openness proper which is it's
it's intellect which is interest in
ideas maybe facility with ideas and
openness which is more like creativity
that's that's now you can't divide them
into interest and ideas and creativity
so precisely because they they overlap
to a to a great degree but there is
there is reason for differentiating
between them so for example women are
about a third of a standard deviation
higher than men in openness SL
creativity and men are about a third of
a standard deviation higher than women
in interest and ideas and intellect and
that's actually quite a substantial
difference within a trait that's when
the two traits are so highly correlated
so there's reason to do the to do the
fractionation so anyways so we're going
to concentrate on openness today and the
reason that I'm presenting the trait
description first rather than moving
immediately into say IQ and creativity
is because it's reasonable to it's
useful to know that you can take
intelligence and put it in the big five
taxonomy and you can actually measure
intelligence a lot more accurately with
an IQ test and perhaps also with a
creativity test than you can with a
self-report personality test that relies
on adjectives you know because I could
ask you guys well how smart are you on a
scale of 1 to seven and that would be
roughly correlated with your IQ but if I
really wanted to know how smart you were
roughly speaking it would be much better
to give you an IQ test and if I was
wanting to know how creative you are
rather than asking you how creative you
are and getting you to report even
though there would be some accuracy in
that it would be better actually to give
you some of the different tests of
creativity that we'll talk about today
now the weird thing about the big five
or one of the weird things about it is
that we don't have great tests for the
traits independently of self-report for
almost all of the traits so for
example one of the things that I've been
trying to do in my lab for the last 5
years is to find some sort of laboratory
task that conscientious people do better
on or unconscientious people do worse on
and you think that would be simple
because conscientiousness for example is
a very good predictor of long-term life
exess success it's also a very good
predictor of University grades it's not
as good as IQ but it's still a good
predictor but we have had one insanely
difficult time trying to find a
non-self-report test that associate that
that that actually predicts
conscientiousness so much appreciated
yesen
sare no it's neuroticism neuroticism is
associated with being more self-aware
and it's actually it loads on negative
emotion so being self-conscious is
associated with being high in negative
emotion I mean you can assess
neuroticism using tests that that ask
you about anxiety and emotional pain or
depression but that's also not much
different than than than self-report
anyways we're going to concentrate on
openness today and we're going to
concentrate both on creativity and
intelligence and there's actually almost
nothing in Psychology that's more
contentious generally speaking than the
investigations into the the the
technical or the what the the set of
skills and abilities that falls under
Trade openness and the reason for that
and this is especially the case with
intelligence is
that intelligence is actually quite
measurable we've been able to measure it
since roughly the beginning of the of
the of the 20th century um Benet
originated the first I would say
reliable and valid IQ tests and they've
been used quite extensively for a long
period of time and
IQ I'll tell you what IQ is as we go
through this but there isn't anything
that social scientists have been able to
measure more successfully than IQ and
there's nothing that socialist or very
little one there's one exception
the relationship between income
inequality and male homicide is a power
more powerful relationship than the
relationship between IQ say and General
Life success or IQ and general school
Success it's it's even a little stronger
than the relationship between IQ and the
rate at which you learn something new
but other than that it's pretty slim
pickings and so we're going to walk
through very carefully how IQ is IQ
tests are created and formulated and
exactly what it is that they measure and
why and we'll equate that to some degree
to creativity and also differentiate it
from creativity as well making the
assumption that the aspects of openness
intellect and and openness proper are
the proper aspects and that they're
usefully
differentiated so the first thing that
you might want to consider is that the
world is a very complicated place now
we've talked about this before and the
way that you handle there's way too much
complexity for you to handle in its in
its entirety so for example in a room
like this there's an endless number of
phenomena that you could focus your
attention on right from the sort of
macro phenomena which would be the
overall say color or appearance of the
room to the micro phenomena which would
be the details at the highest level of
detail that you're able to perceive that
litter the landscape anywhere and so one
of the problems that you have to solve
when you're operating in the world is
how you perceive the world and we do
that in part by making would say that we
perceive low resolution representations
of the world and we also confuse those
with the world so when I'm looking at
you I'm really looking at a low
represent what I perceive consciously is
a low represent low resolution
representation of you right I only see
the front of you to begin with I only
see your surface
and in some sense you know I even
perceive you in some sense as a more or
less uniform color it's hard to tell
exactly what color skin is it's sort of
a light pink roughly speaking but my my
perception is fairly is fairly I don't
know a better way of putting it than low
resolution and I seem to perceive you at
the level of resolution that's that's
sufficient the the lowest resolution
that's sufficient to facilitate our
interactions because I don't want to
clutter up my perceptions of you when
we're just talking with excess detail so
there's lots of things about you I don't
need to see I certainly can't see any of
your micro structures below the below
the phenomenal level like I can't tell
without tremendous further investigation
What You're Made Of biologically for
example and I certainly can't perceive
the networks of society that you're
engaged in your family or the other
sorts of networks that you're embedded
in I see you here now the front of you
at low resolution and you can tell that
to some degree and we've talked about
this before because if you see say
animated movies that use very low
resolution representations of people
like South Park is a really good example
because the imitate or the animation in
South Park's very iconic and and and and
simple it actually makes almost no
difference to following the story and so
that shows you how iconic your
perception really is can be replaced by
very simple icons and you instantly
adapt to that you know and so we can go
and see The Lego Movie Batman Lego Movie
for example and the fact that it's
Batman which is an abstraction to begin
with and then it's made out of Legos is
almost irrelevant to following the plot
so some people have compared our
perceptions to the user interface on a
computer you know when you're
interacting with your computer you don't
really interact so to speak with the
computer there are iconic
representations on the screen of the
computer that you interact with and
those represent obviously they share
some functional relationship with what's
going on in the computer but mostly
they're there so that you using your
perceptual structures can interact with
the computer in a manner that's easy for
extremely intelligent Apes roughly
speaking now so one of the problems that
you have to solve in the world because
it's so full of detail and so complex is
how do you actually see the world how do
you actually perceive it and it isn't
really self-evident that that's a
problem because you think when you look
at the world that it just presents
itself to you but it's a tremendously
complicated problem and that's partly
why developing artificial intelligence
systems that can actually see the world
and act in it in any real way has proved
to be a much more difficult problem than
people had originally supposed because
you know we were told maybe from the
early 60s onwards that such things as
speech to text or object Rec recognition
or robots that could operate in the
world we're only two or three years away
and well I mean we're in we're in a
situation now where there are some
fairly complicated robots built but
they're still really in their nent form
and it's because perceiving the world
and then figuring out how to act and it
turns out to be a much more complicated
problem than we originally thought
because the borders between things are
not self-evident and what level of
resolution you should be perceiving
things at for say maximal functional
utility is also not self-evident it's
also tied up very strangely and in ways
we don't understand with the nature of
your embodiment you know so for example
we tend to see see things that are handy
because we can pick them up and
manipulate them and we can make use of
them and so to some degree our brains
are evolved to make the world manifest
itself to us in a set of discret usable
tools that's that's a reasonable way of
thinking about it and they're discreet
and usable because we have a certain
kind of biological platform you know
because we have hands and mouths and
because we walk in a bipedal manner then
it's logical for us to break up the
world in a manner that makes operating
in this body maximally useful but that
doesn't mean that there's a
straightforward one-to-one relationship
between our perceptions of things and
the things themselves quite the contrary
and that's partly of course we know that
because with any perceptable object like
I could con cize you as one thing for
all sorts of purposes but if I'm trying
to solve a complex problem in
relationship to you it's going to be
very difficult to determine how to
conceptualize you so if I'm if you come
to me because you're suffering from a
psychological problem of some sort then
I have to figure out you know is it
organic is it is it there's actually
something physiological wrong with you
and I need to know what level of
analysis I would probably conceptualize
you at is it psychological is it and if
it's psychological is it functional like
do you lack the skills or do you lack
the ability to apply the skills or is
there something really gone wrong with
your family or maybe it's even a
reflection of an overarching
sociological problem we know for example
that when the unemployment rate goes up
1% psychiatric hospitalizations go up
5% and so then you might ask well you
know if you're if there's a huge rise in
depression and anxiety across the
population and at the same time there's
a huge increase in in unemployment you
have to ask yourself what level of
perception would best be suited to solve
that problem because it isn't
self-evident that it's psychological at
the level of the individual anyways my
point is is that perception is a very
difficult problem and so now here's
here's something interesting you can
think about this for a minute I went and
saw an autistic woman speak at one point
her name was Temple grandon she's really
worth looking up Temple grandon is a
very interesting person she's very
seriously autistic when she was a child
but her mother and her worked her out of
it so that she could be she's very
functional she works as a professor I
don't remember where it's in the midwest
somewhere now she's famous not only be
for being a highly functional autistic
person who talks a fair bit about what
it's like to be autistic but also for
Designing slaughter houses across the
United States and the reason she can do
that as far as she's concerned is
because she thinks she thinks like an
animal thinks and so she doesn't and and
she's identified maybe at least part of
what the core problem is with autism so
she the talk I heard her at was in
Arizona and and it was a was a really uh
entrancing talk she showed some showed
some really interesting pictures of
animals so what she's done is she's
redesigned slaughter houses so that when
the animals enter the slaughterous they
go in a like a spiral basically they
can't see what's around the corner and
the walls are high so they're not
distracted by anything outside so one of
the things she showed for example was a
bunch of cows was going through a
standard uh sequence of of gates
essentially and off to the side there
was a windmill spinning and the cows
would stop because the windmill they
didn't understand what the windmill was
and they'd stop or showed other pictures
where cows were going down a pathway too
and there was a Coke can sitting in the
middle of the pathway and the cows would
all stop because they didn't know what
to do with it or she had another picture
of cows out in the middle of the field
all surrounding a briefcase and they
were all looking at the briefcase and
the cows didn't like anything that
shouldn't be there and had a hard time
mapping it now she said here here was a
little exercise she did she said think
of a
church okay so maybe you think you
imagine a child's drawing of a church
it's like your standard house like a
pentag pentagon right which is basically
how children draw the front of a house
with a steeple on top and maybe a cross
on top of it or something like that
which actually isn't at church it's an
icon of a church and you think about how
children draw houses too Pentagon
rectangle
what is it
trapezoid chimney almost always with
smoke which is quite interesting it's I
don't know where kids get that exactly
but they almost always draw a chimney
with smoke even though chimneys with
smoke aren't that common anymore but
anyways you know you you can see what a
child's picture of a house looks like in
your imagination one of the things that
you might want to think about is that is
not a picture of a house at all right
it's an iconic representation that's
kind of like a heroglyph because no
house looks like that and then you think
about how a child will draw a person
Circle stick stick stick stick stick and
you show it to someone they go that's a
person it's like really it looks nothing
like a person right it I mean you you
immediately recognize it as a person but
it looks nothing like a person well what
grandon said was that when she thinks of
a church she has to think of a church
she's seen she can't take the set of all
churches and Abstract out an iconic
representation and use that to represent
the set of all churches she has she gets
fixated on specific Exemplar and she
thinks that one of the problems with
autistic people and they have a very
difficult time uh developing Language by
the way is that they can't abstract out
a generalized representation across a
set of entities they can't abstract and
then they and well and of course if you
can't abstract then it's also very
difficult to manipulate the abstractions
and you see very strange Behavior with
autistic children for example so they
don't like people and that's because
people don't stay in their perceptual
boxes like a human being is a very
difficult thing to perceive because
we're always shifting around and moving
and doing different things like we don't
stay in our categorical box so autistic
people have real trouble with other
people but they also have trouble so for
example if your autistic child gets
accustomed to your kitchen let's say and
you move a chair then then especially if
they're severely autistic they'll have
an absolute fit about it because you
think kitchen with chair moved they
think completely different place because
they can't abstract the the the
constancies across the different
situations and represent them abstractly
so I I made this little
diagram I made this little diagram here
to to kind of give you a sense of what
you might be doing when you're
abstracting perceptually and so you
could say think about something that's
that complicated it's sort of my model
of how complex the world is but the
world is a lot more complex than that
but the world is made out of everything
is made out of little things and those
little things are made out of little
things and so forth and those things are
nested inside bigger things and so forth
and where you perceive on that level of
of abstraction is somewhat arbitrary it
has to be bounded by your by your goals
that's the other thing is that your
perceptual structures are determined by
the goals that you have at hand I mean
some of that's that's not completely
true because your perceptual systems
also have limitations right there's
things you can't see or hear even if you
need to so there limitations built in
but within that set of limitations
you're still trying to tune your
perceptions to your motivated goals and
that's also very useful to think about
when you're trying to understand
artificial intelligence because for
human beings without goals there's no
perception because there's no filtering
mechanism that you can use to determine
the level of resolution at which you
perceive anyway so there's the there's a
thing made of smaller things which are
made out of smaller things and it's so
it's kind of my iconic representation of
the complexity of the world and then you
could think well what is this how can
you see this object and I think if you
just look at it you can detect it's like
a Necker Cube you know those cubes that
that are line drawings that you can see
the front of and then it'll flip to the
back have you seen those so this is kind
of Necker Cube like or at least it is
for me in that when I look at it my
perceptions play around with it
sometimes I focus on the kind of
cross-like shape in the middle and
sometimes I can see these other lines
and then sometimes I'll focus on that
square and sometimes I can see the
little dots there maybe one dot and my
perceptions are going like this trying
to fit a pattern to it and I you can
kind of detect that when you're watching
it and so I would say well you have the
options of perceiving this in its full
complexity or you can simplify it
essentially there's lots of ways you can
simplify it but some of them are laid
out there so you take the comp complex
thing you make a low resolution
represent ation of it so that's its
rough that's the rough area that all
those dots occupy that's the rough area
broken down to its four most fundamental
quadrants that might be how you would
look at it if if this was a map of an
orchard and you were trying to walk from
south to North that would be a useful
representation this combines this and
this that's
the that's the highest level of
resolution that you can perceive this
object at that's lower resolution than
the object itself so the first issue is
how should you look at things well
that's a problem that intelligence has
to solve so that's one of the problems
that intelligence goes after and then I
think what happens is we have the thing
in itself and then we simplify it with a
perception and that's like a an iconic
representation and then we we nail the
iconic representation with a word and
that's how we compress the world's
complexity into something that we can
manage we take the complex thing make it
into an icon and represent the icon with
a word
and then when I throw you the word so to
speak you decompose it into the icon and
then decompose it even further into the
thing if you can't if you know the icon
and you know the thing and so then we
can use shorthand right because you have
representational structures and so do I
and I'm just tossing you markers about
your representational structures and you
can unfold them that's what you do when
you're reading a novel because the novel
comes alive in your imagination in your
own idiosyncratic way and it would
if you didn't understand the references
of the novel right the novelist has to
assume that your basic perceptual
structures and your intuitions and your
instincts are basically the same as his
or hers because otherwise they have to
assume that because otherwise they would
be lost in an infinite regressive
explanation so and it's problematic
often for example if you start reading
Victorian novels you may find that it
takes a while to get into them because
the presuppositions the expectations are
slightly different and so is the
language you have to update the
representations but anyway so that's
roughly as far as I'm concerned that's
roughly a representation of what
intelligence is doing in the world it's
or a big part of it it's how in the
world do you look at things so that you
can use them for the purposes that you
need to use them for and then the next
problem that intelligence has to solve
which is related is once you've got the
perceptual landscape sorted out how do
you abstractly represent the action
pattern p s that you're going to
implement in the world so it's how do
you perceive where you are
now how do you perceive where you're
going and how do you construct up and
then Implement strategies that enable
you to move from where you are to where
you're going so it's a continual process
of mapping and movement and so it's it's
it's navigation that's what we're doing
in the world all the time is navigating
through it because we're mobile
creatures we're navigating through it
attempting to make the world manifest
itself in accordance with our wishes and
that's the fundamental problem that
intelligence has to solve and animals
have their perceptions to rely on but we
have our perceptions and our ability to
abstract from those perceptions multiple
times and then to abstract finally into
into language so we live in a very
abstracted world and it also means that
we can learn a lesson in one place and
generalize it across many other places
which is also something something that
animals have a hard time doing because
they they don't know how to do that
perceptual initial perceptual
generalization
so okay so then the question might be
well if intelligence has to solve the
problem of how to perceive in and
perceive and navigate within the world
towards ends towards in order to fulfill
uh in in order to uh to make the world
manifest what it needs to manifest so
that you can maintain yourself and stay
alive what ends is it orienting itself
towards and I think that's a good way of
thinking about the traits the traits the
traits motivate the perceptual frame and
so you might think that well extroverted
people are after social success and you
can understand why that would be because
social success brings with it all sorts
of
rewards social failure brings costs and
you could also understand why that would
frighten you away from it and social
success also requires the expenditure of
effort and introverted people seem to be
much more conservative in a sense in
terms of expending social expending
energy socially and I suppose they're
protecting themselves to some degree
against the possibility of social
failure we don't really know we know
more about how extroverts in some sense
how and why extroverts Orient themselves
the way they do in the world we're not
so sure about introverts um what it is
that what the what the proper landscape
is for introverts I I can show you a
word cloud I'll do that at some point
that introverts that were generated from
introverts on Facebook and they seem to
be into fantasy and gaming a lot and and
I don't know why that is exactly because
the fantasy element should be more local
localized in openness but the the the
introverted types I mean I suppose
they're the people that are on The Big
Bang Theory roughly speaking you know
they seem to be the introverted types
and um but don't understand that much
about them exactly how it is that
they're orienting themselves in the
world people are high neuroticism are
oriented towards security and safety
agreeable people versus disagreeable
people are oriented say towards
cooperation versus competition
conscientious people are oriented
towards order Duty obligation and
implementation and open people are
oriented towards abstraction in I both
ideational and in representation and so
those are also to some degree you might
also think about those value systems
right because what you value is
definitely not only what you pursue
that's too narrow a view value is also
what you perceive and pursue and so
thinking about these things as this
entire frame of reference I think is a
much better way of doing it we talked
about this earlier this sort of
structure earlier as a micr personality
and I mentioned that determination of
micr personalities by fundamental
underlying biological systems like
defensive aggression and sexual ual um
sexual uh uh desire and hunger and
thirst and so forth those are all
systems that can grab your perceptions
make you look at the world in a certain
way make you pursue something else in a
certain way and Prime action responses
that are in keeping with all of that the
the traits seem to be something like
higher order agglomerations of those
more fundamental biological motivations
although we don't quite understand the
relationship between the underlying
biology and the traits we're starting to
sort it out so we know for example if
you look at the function of the
hypothalamus the hypothalamus regulates
the basic biological motivations that I
just outlined but it's also the place
where the exploratory systems find their
ultimate physiological grounding and
openness and extroversion seem to be
variant manifestations of the
exploratory impulse and that's grounded
into in the hypothalamus so we're
starting to be able to put the traits to
sort of nail the traits down to their
underlying biology with regards to
neuroticism um well if you're high in
neuroticism you're more sensitive to
anxiety and that's regulated at least in
part by the hippocampus and and
generated in part by the amydala there's
another part of the brain called the per
aqueductal gray that seems to be
associated with the experience of pain
and pain is quite a complex phenomena
depression is pain-like grief is
pain-like social isolation is pain-like
dis disappointment is pain-like there's
anxiety components to that too and so
neuroticism seems to be something like
threshold for Activation in those
negative emotion systems so if you're
higher in neuroticism one unit of
uncertainty might produce let's say
three units of psychophysiological
response whereas if you're lower in
neuroticism one unit of uncertainty
might produce one unit of
psychophysiological response it's heart
you know obviously that's a simplified
schemata but there's variability because
if something unexpected or threatening
happens to you it isn't obvious how
upset you should get one answer would
might be brush it off it's nothing
another answer might be it's a bloody
catastrophe and often when something
uncertain or threatening occurs you
don't have enough information at your
disposal to make a full determination of
the potential import of this of the
circumstance especially if it's
uncertain and so then you have to guess
at how upset you should be and where you
are on the normal distribution with
regards to trait neuroticism say that
sort of determines what your guess on
average is going to be so you know the
other with conscientiousness say you
might say well how hard should you work
well that's a really difficult question
if you're going to die tomorrow and then
you probably shouldn't work very hard
today at all so one one thing you might
say is that the degree to which you
should work hard is dependent on your
assumptions about the stability of the
future we actually know this to be true
because if you put people in wildly
uncertain circumstances they discount
the future which is exactly what you
should do right it's only makes sense to
store up goods for future consumption if
the future is likely to be very similar
to the past and the present you need a
stable Society for that and
conscientiousness only works in in a
stable Society because all you do
otherwise if you're piling up Goods
which is kind of what conscientious
people do is leaving them there for the
criminals to take or waiting for the
next chaotic upheaval to wipe out
everything that you've stored and so
even conscientiousness is a kind of
guess hardworking people say well you
know M uh sacrifice the present for the
future that's great as long as the
future is going to be there and you can
predict it but if it's not going to be
there and it's unpredictable then the
right response is take what you can take
right now well the getting's good now
you know obviously there are troubles
with that too and I'm speaking you know
I'm I'm offering rough rules of thumb
but I'm trying to provide you with some
indication of how and why these
difference in value structures exist
because they're applicable in different
environments you know sometimes in a
dangerous social environment it's not
obvious that being an extroverted person
is a good idea because extroverted
people they stand out especially if
they're extroverted and creative right
because not only are they noisy and and
dominant and assertive they're also
colorful and and flamboyant and
provocative well that's great if you're
in a society that rewards that sort of
thing but if you have you know if you're
ruled by an authoritarian King who wants
absolutely no threat whatsoever to his
stability ever then dressing in Gray and
shutting the hell up is a really good
survival tactic so the utility of the
trait depends on the structure of the
environment that surrounds it and that's
why there's variability in traits and so
you you have to be careful when you're
thinking about it from a strict
scientific perspective to make the
assumption that positioning at any place
on the normal distribution is preferable
preferable to positioning anywhere else
now one exception to that maybe might be
IQ because one of the things that you
can see in I with IQ is that people with
higher IQs seem to do better but that's
also only true in complex societies and
then there's another problem that seems
to emerge with IQ and I don't know
exactly what to make of this but we know
that as women's IQ increases the
probability that they're going to be to
remain without a mate also increases
because women tend to mate across or up
dominance hierarchies and so if you're a
woman with an IQ of 130 then you've
already eliminated about 95% of the men
and that's only using one criteria
that's just straight intelligence and so
there also might be limitations to the
to the utility of intelligence with
regards to reproduction that we don't
really understand very well yet
so anyway so you get the point so
there's these underlying I kind of put
down two value structures there
capitalize on social groups that would
be an extroverted value structure saying
maintain order that would be a a
conscientious strategy and conscientious
people are going to want to maintain
order because they don't want things to
shift across time because if they shift
too much across time then the things
that have been stored up for the future
start to become increasingly irrelevant
there's lots of other reasons to
maintain order as well but that's one of
them
so all right so that your cognitive
ability get allows you to do modeling
now this is where human beings have have
leaped ahead of their competition so an
animal animals can
think but it isn't exactly obvious how
they think they think strategically I
think they think the same way that
children think in some sense when
they're playing with Legos when they're
not thinking about the Legos you know
when they're when they're just moving
them around we know like if you watch a
smart Predator group like lions go after
a you know their target or watch
chimpanzees hunt down a monkey you can
see intelligence at work because hunting
behavior is very very complicated
obviously you know especially if you're
chasing something intelligent but there
isn't that level of abstract
representation so where is so let's look
at this so here's here's a here's a a
picture of the of the human brain um
with someone facing this way right so
here's the here's the primary motor
cortex okay so you're using that to
voluntarily move your body okay now then
I might say to you close your eyes and
imagine doing something so just close
your eyes and imagine picking up the cup
that's in front of you and just
visualize it okay so then you might say
well what part of your brain are you
using then and the answer is use part of
this part this part because it that's
where you have your body represented but
use this part here the premotor cortex
to Envision potential actions now what's
happened is that this part of the brain
evolved out of this part and that makes
sense because the first part is just how
you would move but the second part is
how you would think about how you would
move and then the next part which is
this part huge in human beings is how
you would think about how you would
think about how you would move so be
because that enables you to start to do
extraordinary extraordinarily abstract
planning so I I could say well Envision
how you would pick up the cup and
obviously that's something that you've
separated out as a as a potential
simulation from the actual action but we
can talk about extraordinarily high
level abstractions that have effects
across multiple specific domains way
into the future and the more abstract
that your manipulations become the more
they seem to be moved away say from the
primary motor cortex out into the
prefrontal cortex hierarchies of
abstraction and the the reason for that
as this was Carl poer this is really
really worth thinking about why think
let's say you're an animal and you act
and it doesn't go very well then you die
well you've learned that acting that way
didn't work but now you're dead so
that's not that helpful and then you
might think well maybe you should
represent how you're going to act so you
know here's a box with a snake in it and
your coffee cup is inside the box with
the snake in it and I say to you imagine
picking up the coffee cup and you
imagine it you think oh I'll pick up
that coffee cup and then the snake will
bite me and I'll die and so then you do
you decide that implementing the
strategy of picking up the coffee cup is
probably not a very good idea and so
that stupid idea has to die and not you
and so Popper's idea was that the reason
that we developed the capacity to
abstract was so that our stupid ideas
could die instead of us and that's
really it's almost impossible to
overstate how brilliant an observation
that is because what mean what it means
is that like as a standard animal you
would have to produce variants of
yourself reproductively to go out into
the world and try their hand at survival
and that's pretty costly because you
have to produce all the
biological replications of you so you
could only probably manage that maybe 13
times if you really really worked at it
and then then the cost of their failure
is extraordinarily High because they die
while you can just sit there and produce
like 20 different ver versions of
you extending out over the next week or
the next month and you can run them
through a simulation and kill off all
the ones that you don't regard as
suitable and then only implement the
successful ones now you know you could
debate about how accurate you might be
at doing that because it would depend on
your knowledge but we do know that
intelligent people tend to do better
across the course of their life and so
it does seem that there is some
utility with regards to survival or at
least with regards to positioning in the
dominance hierarchy which is somewhat of
a proxy for survival and for
Reproductive success there's some
association between that and the ability
to abstract so we could say that part of
the reason that people got smarter was
because smarter people were more likely
to stay alive now I think it's more
complicated than that too because I
believe that human males and females are
in an evolutionary cognitive arms race
roughly speaking and so as men get
trickier women get trickier to
understand them and then as women get
trickier to understand men get trickier
to understand them and so we've been
chasing each other around this cortical
expansion Loop pretty much since we
parted ways with our common with the
ancestor that we had in common with
chimpanzees and so that's roughly about
7 million years ago we've undergone a
tremendous cortical expansion since then
and there's there's lots of reasons that
that have been propelling that
so so what do you have to do when you're
thinking well you have to figure out
where you are and how to see that you
have to figure out where you're going
and what that should be and then you
have to you have to um generate and
represent appropriate action strategies
and simulate those in time and space and
then one of the things that's worth
noting is that's what you do when you
read a story or when you tell a story
and so part of the reason that you like
to read stories is because that's
exactly what story stories are telling
you how someone is going about doing
that and so then you can see how if you
think about preference for fiction which
is actually part of openness preference
for fiction the utility in fiction is
that allows you to experience a plethora
of simulated worlds and to embody the
consequences in abstraction without
having to go through the trouble of
doing that for yourself and we do know
there's good empirical literature now
showing some of it done by ex students
from my lab showing that reading fiction
does improve your interpersonal
intelligence for example your ability to
understand the position of other people
logically enough because that's what
you're doing when you're reading so okay
so I'm trying to give you some
background so that you can understand
what it means to abstract and also why
it's useful because we need that in
order to move forward with the idea of
intelligence so here we go okay so
that's how you act voluntarily and then
that's how you represent how you act
voluntarily and then that's how you
think about how you represent acting
voluntarily and the reason I'm telling
you this is because it's useful to think
about intelligence as abstract action
because we tend to think about
intelligence as abstract representation
right intelligence is the manipulation
of facts or the understanding of facts
but if you look at it neurologically I
would say that's a misapprehension
because the part of the brain that does
the highest level of abstract thinking
is actually something that's emerged
from the motor cortex now you can that
doesn't mean you don't use your
intelligence to represent you do but the
purpose of intelligence is to represent
potential action patterns and we're
embodied creatures and we need to move
in the world and so that's the proper as
far as I'm concerned that's the proper
way to conceptualize intelligence
so and here's a here's a a study I'll
read you the study imagery in the premot
cortex well studies on healthy subjects
have shown a partial overlap between the
motor execution and motor imagery neural
circuits few have investigated brain
activity during motor imagery and stroke
patients with hemiparesis so a partial
overlap between the motor execution and
motor imagery neural circuits well
here's an interesting side consequence
of
that so let's say I'm thirsty and I look
at that glass of water and part of what
happens when I look at the glass of
water is that my eyes activate this
directly so you know I've already talked
to you to some degree about how your
eyes work right there's patterns there
out there in the world the patterns are
mapped onto the the retina so it's a
pattern display uh Matrix and then that
pattern is propagated along the optic
nerve and then that pattern manifests
itself in the visual cortex and then
that pattern manifests itself in the
motor cortex and it manifests itself in
bodily movement or preparation for
bodily movement technically you don't
need conscious imagery for that to
happen now that's something really
useful to know is that your eyes can
activate your body without you being
aware of the image because you think
there's the world I see it then I
determine how to act it's like yes but
also no there's the world and seeing It
prepares me to act forget about the damn
imagery so when I look at that cup part
of
the part of the act of looking at it is
preparing that gesture and that's a
especially the case if I also happen to
be thirsty because if I'm thirsty the
cup signifies something that I can use
to quench my thirst which makes it a
very different thing than what it is
when it's empty or when I'm not thirsty
so I'm not even going to use the same
part of my brain to perceive it because
it's not the same thing in relationship
to me so I look at it and then just just
even just understanding the size of it
there's not much difference between
understanding the size of it and doing
this so you let's see how I got that so
that's pretty
good so that's my under when you ask
well what does it mean to understand
something well that's what it means in
so far as this is a cup because it could
be Tinder for lighting a fire for
example or something to stomp on to make
a noise in so far as it's a cup then
understanding it means pattern mapping
it onto exactly
this and if I do that
successfully then I get a little reward
a little hint a little kick of dopamine
and that dopamine makes me feel a little
bit better but it also bathes the neural
tissue that I use to make that
perceptual that to to to structure that
perception and also to undertake that
act and it makes it just a little bit
more likely that I'll see it that way
and act that way in its presence again
and that's how you learn right you lay
out a perceptual scheme it's got a goal
if the perceptual scheme and it's
associated action patterns make the goal
manifest itself then you get a little
burst of positive emotion click then
that makes it those little the neural
circuits that instantiated that thrive a
little bit and get a little bit more
predominant and that's also why you got
to watch yourself if you're taking
psychomotor stimulants like cocaine or
alcohol even for that matter because
they produce
hyperlearning and so you know I'll
glance at that and maybe it'll trigger
off a bit of thirst but if that was if I
was a cocaine addict and that was
cocaine par parhelia and I glanced at it
was like w that thing that I've built in
my head out of repeated you know massive
hits of dopamine is going to grab my
perceptual structures and my actions and
bring me that'll be that craving which
is an Impulse to move forward towards it
you'll feel that instantiated in your
body that's the craving it's very very
difficult to get rid of that even if
you're if you're a cocaine
abuser and you've gone to a treatment
center for several weeks and got over
the worst of the least initial parts of
of the relearning not to abuse the
second you go back into your natural
environment and take a look at the
cues bang that thing will be right back
there directing your action and what
happens is when one of those perceptual
systems comes up you can see this when
you're hungry it supresses all the other
potential perceptual systems you can see
this when you're angry too right you get
angry and you're angry with your partner
and all you can think of is all the
stupid things they've done for the last
10 years you don't even remember that
you like them it's like you could remind
them I know you're but remember you like
me well not right now you know so so it
just it shows you how those micro
personalities cond Dominate and suppress
that's that's what happens because if
they didn't suppress the other micr
personalities they wouldn't be able to
run themselves to
conclusion and then you'd never get what
you want okay so anyways
um Studies have shown a partial overlap
between the motor execution and motor
imagery neural circuits so what happens
is you see something and it primes you
for the appropriate
action few have investigated brain
activity during motor imagery in stroke
patients with hemiparesis hemiparesis is
is uh motor impairment from from uh from
the stroke this work is exam aimed at
examining similarities between motor
imagery and execution in a group of
stroke patients 11 patients were asked
to perform a visal motor tracking task
by either physically or mentally
tracking a sine wave Force Target using
their thumb and index finger so they're
doing
this during fmri
scanning results whole brain analysis
confirmed shared neural substrates
between motor imagery and motor
execution in bilateral premotor cortex
so that's the part that I was talking
about I won't tell you about the rest of
the brain in parial lulle is is partly
associated with body recognition
so so basically I I I showed you that
study because it it it's one it's one of
the studies that lend Credence to what I
was just describing is that imagery is
the precursor to action and that it's
Associated you get the imagery going
here and the action there think about
think about thinking think act that's
roughly how it
works okay now now down to cognitive
ability
well how can you conceptualize
intelligence well this is a major
problem because your initial
conceptualization determines in part the
strategies that you're going to use to
investigate intelligence and when you
say when you when you pair a sentence
down to what is intelligence the
sentence is problematic because part of
it is a question
about H if and how such a thing might
manifest itself in the world
so there's a fact out there that or set
of facts that corresponds to
intelligence but the other problem is
well what do you mean when you say
intelligence and you kind of have to
nail that down if you're going to have
a conversation about intelligence that
doesn't go entirely astray and so you've
got a you've got a definitional problem
as well as an empirical problem and
so there have been and this was
especially true in the
1990s people have been studying
intelligence IQ intelligence since the
1920s and and is a very wellestablished
branch of psychology one of the things I
have to tell you about IQ research is
that if you don't buy IQ research you
might as well throw away all the rest of
psychology and the reason for that is
that the psychologists first of all who
developed intelligence testing were
among the early psychologists who
instantiated the statistical techniques
that all psychologists use to verify and
test all of their hypotheses so you end
up throwing the baby out with the bathat
and the IQ people have defined
intelligence in a more stringent
stringent and accurate way than we've
been able to Define almost any other
psychological construct and so if you
toss out the one that's most well
defined then you're kind of stuck with
the problem of what are you going to do
with all the ones that you have left
over that are nowhere near as well
defined or as well measured or as or as
uh or or whose predictive validity is
much less and has been demonstrated with
much less Vigor and Clarity anyways
despite all that people have posited a
number of different intelligences and
reasonably so because there's if you
think of intelligence
as that which might move you forward
successfully in the world obviously
there's a fair number of phenomena that
are associated with individuals that
might fit into that category so we
have people have made these distinctions
Bob Sternberg for example is
distinguished between practical versus
analytical intelligence and he kind of
thinks of practical as like Street
smarts and has attempted to dissociate
that from the kind of analytical
intelligence that um that characterizes
more straight IQ research I I don't
think he's done it successfully as well
at all and since the 1990s interest in
his practical intelligence has declined
precipitously because when it is matched
head-to-head with with standard IQ
intelligence the IQ intelligence eats up
all the variability what's really
happened as far as I can tell so far is
that when we're trying to predict
people's course through
life IQ does a very good job and then
one of the traits does a very good job
as well which is
conscientiousness but it doesn't do as
good a job as IQ now that partly might
be because we can't measure
conscientiousness very
well we're stuck with self-reports or
maybe I could gather peer reports about
you or I could gather your parents
reports about you or teachers reports
and each of those seems to pick up a
little bit more of the pattern because
you know yourself but other people know
you differently than you know yourself
and there's still some accuracy in that
you can get multiple rer reports of
something like conscientiousness and
that'll up its predictive validity but
in the final analysis the best you seem
to be able to do with conscientiousness
is about a point4 correlation with
long-term performance whereas with IQ in
complex jobs you can probably get 0.5
and maybe 6 and so 0.5 is 25% of the
variance you got to square it 6 is 30%
36% of the variance and 04 is 16% of the
variance so even at the low end let's
say high end for conscientiousness is 04
or 16% low end for IQ is 0.5 or 25%
low-end estimates of IQ make it one and
a half times more powerful than the
high-end estimates of conscientiousness
and I think that's about right you'd
think why do we even have to debate this
and because it's so bloody obvious to me
that intelligence is a major predictor
of Life success I mean you people I
measured the IQ of University of Toronto
people you know people in this room who
have an IQ of less than 120 are rare
well why well smart people go to
university now is that actually a
contentious statement well it shouldn't
be a contentious statement it's
self-evident universities were actually
set up so that smart people could expand
their abilities that's why they were
there and you're selected on the basis
of Assessments that are essentially
there to assess something like
intelligence yes but that that well
that's that's well that is part of the
controversy is it reasonable and this is
a measurement issue and that's why we're
that's why I've been instructing you to
some degree in psychometrics because we
actually know how to do this we know how
to answer that question so let's take a
look at how at how intelligence has been
assessed and why and then you can make
up your own mind anyways here's some of
the examples of other forms of
intelligence and so then the question is
well what does it mean to have a
different form of intelligence would
would form a and Form B be completely
uncorrelated like extroversion say in
neuroticism or would they be slightly
correlated or would they be highly
correlated and then you might ask well
how highly correlated do they have to be
before they're the same thing or how
uncorrelated do they have to be before
they're different things and actually
the answer to that comes down to
something like practical utility it's
like imagine I'm trying to figure out
how well you'll do in University and I
measure one thing and it's correlated at
7 with another thing I measure about you
then I might say well are those two
things the same or different they're
pretty highly correlated you're high in
one it means you're going to be high in
the other well so what is there any
utility in measuring both things and the
way you figure that out actually is you
do it statistically so we take the
target which might be your performance
across University then we say well can
we predict your performance across
University better by using one variable
or two variables so we would enter them
both into a regression equation all a
regression equation does it's quite
simple so you're trying to predict the
Target and the regression AG the
regression equation tells you how well
you can predict that Target if you know
another fact now then gets a little
complicated because that's a correlation
how well you can predict B with a well a
regression will say how much you can
predict C if you know a and b or a and b
and c and d and e because you can use
multiple predictors and you can waight
them so it might be 2 * a + 1 * b equals
c and that's all a regression equation
does it's just multiplication and
addition very very straightforward and
so two variables are sufficiently
different functionally if you can use
both of them simultaneously to predict
something of Interest so again it's a
tool likee approach this is how the
psychometricians do it is something real
well it's real if you can measure
measure it and it helps you predict
that's that's how it's defined so then
you might say well
are are there these multiple
intelligences well the first question
would be well what do you mean by are
there and the answer to that would be
well let's specify the question since
we're going to be scientific about it
let's predict how well people do in
University we'll start with the
assumption that
intelligence if intelligence isn't
associated with University success then
you're probably not talking about
intelligence now you could argue that
right because you could say well
intelligence has nothing to do with
University success but that's a
definitional matter we'd have to agree
to begin with is it reasonable to start
with the presupposition that
intelligence and University success
share something in common well I think
you have to be daed to
to deny that initial proposition
although you
could because you could say it was
privilege or socioeconomic status or or
or or any number of sociological
phenomena and some of those are
obviously relevant social class for
example because you know if you're in a
higher social class and all things being
equal intelligence included if you're in
a higher social class you're more likely
to go to university than you are if
you're in a lower social class so
there's other there's other factors that
are going to influence whether or not
you do well in University but we're
going to assume that one of them might
be
intelligence well then you would ask
well if you measured social
intelligence so that's what do they call
that social intelligence no emotional
intelligence which does not exist by the
way emotional intelligence moral
intelligence linguistic musical logical
mathematical spatial body kinesthetic
interpersonal and interpersonal all
different forms of intelligence okay so
to answer the question question of
whether they exist what you do first is
pick a Target prediction of University
performance then you make a measure for
each of them then you test to see if the
measure measured the same thing across
multiple instances within the same
person that's a reliability test because
what the hell good is your ruler if it
stretches when you use it it has to
measure the same thing multiple times
and then you would say okay we'll take
all these different intelligences
measured the way we've decided to
measure them the first thing we'll do is
see how highly correlated are CU if
they're complete two of them are
completely correlated then you have one
you don't have two CU that's the
virtually the definition of one instead
of two you can Factor analyze them and
see if you can pull out what's common
across all of them that's another thing
because then you might say well
intelligence is what's common across all
the measures of these intelligences it's
it's a proposition it's not a fact you
have to decide if you're going to agree
with it but that if you were going to do
that you'd use a factor analysis and
you'd say well if someone was more
likely to be musical if they were also
high in linguistic ability and more
likely to be logical and mathematically
inclined if they had high spatial
ability Etc then you'd be hypothesizing
that there was one factor behind all of
those manifestations that's somehow
similar and maybe there wouldn't be and
then you'd take all your measures and
you'd put them in something like a
multiple regression analysis and you'd
predict your Target University
performance and then maybe you'd say
well wait a minute let's not just use
University performance let's use Junior
high performance high school performance
University performance and job success
and then let's say that only things that
predict success across all of those
categories and that are the same we're
going to Define as intelligence well
that's basically how you end up with
IQ you could say that IQ is what's
common across all possible sets of of
intelligence tests now people are going
to debate that because you still have to
Define what constitutes a test but the
way the psychometricians have managed it
and have taken care of this at least to
some degree is to say well we're going
to we're not going to Define everything
that we measure as intelligence so
extroverted people are more socially
fluent are we going to call that
intelligence no we're going to call that
personality we're going to call that
extroversion and we're going to call
stress tolerance you could say well if
you can tolerate more stress you're more
intelligent it's like well no that isn't
how we've defined it we're going to
Define that as being lower in aism if
you're Cooperative you're more
intelligent that's emotional
intelligence well what you're less
intelligent if you're competitive well
no so we parsed that off to
agreeableness so then the question might
be is there anything left of these
so-called intelligences once you control
for personality and IQ and the answer is
no nothing nothing left of them and the
people who keep pushing these ideas keep
trying to push them because they don't
like the idea of real individual
differences and to me that's just a
matter of sticking your damn head in the
sand because it's obvious here you're
going to have a child you want the child
to have an IQ of 65 or 145 decide okay
so you're all going to vote okay you
think any one of you is going to vote to
have a child with an IQ of 65 that
child's going to have a hard time
developing even linguistic ability
they're never going to learn to read
right they're never going to leave home
in all likelihood so which child are you
going to pick well so do you believe in
intelligence or not well obviously if
you have any sense um so let's say we
took off all the labels and we just for
every time something statistically came
out other we just gave it a
lab so all these things just have their
statistical validity and just names so
then we're going to assign Nam to them
after are we assigning the names based
on what we consider to be reasonable
okay that's a good question so look here
here's one thing so let's say this is
actually what happened when people
developed the big five so I'm going to
give a very large number of people every
question every a huge set of questions
that cover every element of their
personality I can think of it's agnostic
right what I'm really trying to do is
come up with the biggest possible set of
descriptors that someone could actually
fill out that's a li you know I can't
give you 10,000 questions that's just so
maybe i' take a set of 10,000 questions
and randomly select a few sets of a 100
right because then I I would have
represented the entire set then I give
them to a th people agnos
then I do the factor analysis bang five
factors come out and then the factor
analysis tells me which questions load
on each factor and what the factor
analysis is saying here's 20 questions
and there's something about them that's
the same so then I read the questions
and I think well those questions are
referring to something the same what is
that well then maybe I talk to three
colleagues and we think well that's
something like sociability bang we have
a name and then we could go see now that
we have a measure of sociability we
could go associate it with other
measures of sociability like we might
say well are people who score high on
this measure of sociability more likely
to go to parties and the answer would be
yes because what happens if you take
10,000 questions about personality and
randomly select sets of a 100 and give
each of them to a thousand people and do
a factor analysis the first factor is
extroversion and it's the it's the
factor in human personality that seems
to pick up the biggest amount of variant
and so so then we say from a statistical
perspective Ive extroversion is real but
we Define real real means that if you
use linguistic
representation randomly applied across
large sets of people and you factor
analyze it these come out as Clump
together because you have to Define what
constitutes real if you're going to play
that this is real game which is
basically what you're doing in science
and so that's what happened with the big
five and then people started to look
well okay is there a biological
substrate for this bang turns out there
is incentive reward that's the positive
reward system so and then well
neuroticism that's often but not always
the second Factor well is there a
biological basis for it yes threat
sensitivity and pain sensitivity they
seem to lock together agreeableness
that's the care system that yak PP has
identified so that's basically that's
basically maternity it's something like
that you had another question
people intelligence well it's because we
found out how to measure intelligence so
and I'll get into that right now so then
the question is well how do you measure
intelligence okay well it's similar it's
similar to this linguistic approach but
here's how it
differs generate 10,000 questions that
require knowledge and you get get 50
people to do it and have them and have
them be of diverse opinions about what
constitutes knowledge so much the better
then you cover the you want to over
sample the territory so you want to have
some qu questions in there that only one
person out of 50 would think that
measures intelligence because you can
oversample the statistics will take care
of that so you want to answer ask more
questions than you think are reasonable
and that's part of the way that you get
rid of bias in the sampling it's like
you think go find out 10 questions that
someone could answer if you think
they're intelligent I don't care what
they are and then 50 of you do that
bring me the questions well let's say we
get a nice set of 10,000 questions
then we can take random sets of a 100
and give them to a th people and then we
can score their answers to the questions
and then we can rank order we could say
correlate their performance across
different sets of questions so I give
you one set of 100 questions you score
90 I give you another set of questions
you score so 90 out of 100 you score 10
out of 100 well then we would think if a
bunch of people did that those aren't
measuring the same thing because if
you're high on one you should be high on
all of them well with IQ it's like if
you do that the reliability is like 0. n
it's
unbelievable you take one set of 100
questions you rank order people you take
another set of 100 questions you rank
order people you correlate the rank
orders it's like this it's 0. n the
people who did well on one do well on
all of them the people who did bad on
one do bad on all of them that's IQ or
more technically this is what IQ is take
a thousand people and give them 20 tests
of 100 items and then Factor analyze the
20 tests and extract out the central
Factor that's
G that's fluid intelligence so then what
do you do with that well then you can
try to use it then you can see well is
there a biological basis for this is
there something about if you're higher
in the ability to operate across these
sets of questions are there things about
you that are physiologically different
and the answer to that is yes your
reaction time is faster just simple
reaction time so light turn on you push
a button light turns on you push a
button okay there's a lag between the
light going on and you pushing the
button the shorter the lag the smarter
you are well what is it and that's
really interesting because you know if
you're perceiving something
complex it takes a lot of neural
connections to generate the perception
but simple reaction time is like two
neurons whack there's no complexity in
that at all and yet how fast you are at
that is still correlated only at about
0.25 but that's not trivial if you're
doing research in Psychology generally
speaking and you come out with a 0.25
correlation between whatever you're
measuring and whatever you're interested
in you're having a pretty good day 0.25
is not bad at all and so it's not
accounting for all of it but it's
accounting for a fair bit of it how big
your head is that's also correlated how
how big your brain is physically and
then even more accurately how big your
brain is in relationship to your body
now again these are small correlations
but they're not they're not
nonsignificant
what else nerve peripheral nerve
conduction velocity that's this study
two studies with sample sizes of 90 and
90 roughly speaking are reported that
investigated relationships among
measures of intelligence speed of
information processing and peripheral
nerve conduction velocity in both
studies neural conduction velocity was
significantly correlated with IQ scores
042 and 048 man that's a whopping
correlation how do I know that because a
guy named hemp Hill where is he right
there you might say well how big is a
correlation coefficient before you call
it Big and the answer to that is
generally let's guess so if you talk to
psychologists and they talk to you about
how big effect sizes are they use
guesses that were generated by
statisticians in the 50s and so they
radically underestimate the actual
magnitude of correlation coefficients
because they never studied it
empirically well this guy hhal because
how big is a correlation coefficient to
be big how do you answer that take a
thousand psychology studies rank order
the effect sizes and break them into
percentiles right that's an empirical
way of doing it how big is the effect
that the typical study generates then
you can use that as a way of assessing
how impressive the effect is that you
generated okay so this is it here hemp
Hill 2003 interpreting the magnitude of
Co correlation coefficients now you
could say that's a Dopey way to do it
because wide defined size in accordance
with the size that people have
discovered and hemp Hill would say well
that's because I'm doing it this way
with this paper if you want to do it a
different way go right ahead but there's
utility in this you come up with an R of
point2 How likely is it that your next
paper is going to have an effect size of
that magnitude how happy should you be
well the answer is a lot happier than
you think
so to get an R of 05 that's 25% of the
variance so you still have 75% of what's
ever explaining your phenomena left to
be explained
R of5 90 to 90 97th percentile so 19 out
of 20 psychology studies that are
published and that's a hell of a lot
more fewer psychology studies than exist
right because this tiny fraction of them
get published 95% of them show a a
correlation coefficient of less than 0.5
for for third. 35 to 050 it's that's
greater than 75% of them 0.15 to35 is
pretty typical and the typical
correlation between a personality trait
and the target of interest is usually
something in the neighborhood of 0. 2 to
0.25 with IQ you get up to 0.5 the
relationship between income inequality
and male homicide is like 75 it just
covers all of it which is to say
that everywhere that everyone's poor
there's no male homicide and everywhere
that everyone's Rich there's no male
homicide but places where there's poor
people and rich people the male homicide
rate goes way the hell up right
especially if it's a steep distribution
because the men at the bottom think
somebody has a lot more than me and
that's not very fair I'm going to do
something about that and that usually
means killing other men and so it's a
it's unbelievably powerful relationship
that's a useful thing to keep squired
away in your imagination poverty does
not cause
crime relative poverty causes crime that
is a completely different thing
so and it's dominance hierarchy issue
fundamentally it's man man are generally
the criminals and as the dominance
hierarchy gets harder to climb the young
men especially the aggressive ones get
more likely to turn to violence you
really need to know that it's a
incredibly important fact I'm going to
interview the guy who figured that out
Martin Dy I'm going to interview him for
one of my podcasts in the next month or
so so you might be interested in tuning
in on that if you're interested in this
sort of thing okay so back to these
correlations look peripheral nerve
conduction velocity is correlated with
IQ at like Point let's say 045 it's a
whopping effect man and that's that's a
pretty straightforward thing speed of
electrical propagation along your neural
tissue determines how intelligent you
are well is that really so surprising
you'd expect if that's associated with
neurological integrity at least to some
degree it's exactly the sort of thing
you'd expect but it shows you how
biologically based it is too faster
neural conductance velocity was
associated with higher IQ scores and
faster speed of processing
why who knows here's a hypothesis
um what if you're trying to remember a
phone number just the seven digigit one
what do you do when you're remembering
the phone number you say it over and
over again right or you or you if you
don't say it you think it over and over
again and if someone distracts you then
you lose it that's working memory
roughly speaking and your working memory
capacity so imagine you could do four
digits and remember them you could do
six you could do eight you could do 12
likely not 12 is really pushing it
that's a great estimator of IQ working
memory in fact there's almost no
neuropsychologists like to think that
working memory is something in and of
itself but that's because they don't
know a damn thing about psychometrics
generally speaking there's almost no
difference between fluid intelligence
and working memory and the reason for
that is that all measures of
intellectual function collapse into G
and so we can take a look at what that
means this is from this character here
Carol John Carrol if you want to know
everything there is to know about IQ
this is a book that everyone who's a
psychologist should it should you
shouldn't be able to be a psychologist
unless you've read this book in my
estimation there's a couple of key texts
and this is one of them this guy Carol
wrote this thick book you don't have to
read the whole thing because a lot of
it's just in some sense demonstrations
and proof of what he's saying but what
he did for IQ is the same thing that
psychometricians did for the big five
you've got the big two at the top
they're not very highly correlated I
think it's about 2 something like that
so they're pretty independent then they
fragment into the big five and then you
can differentiate them further into the
Big 10 and there really are five
different traits because they're only
correlated with each other at about 2
to3 they're really quite
distinct um the question is if you
fractionate IQ how correlated are the
things that you fractionated into and
the answer to that is 08 or 0.9 there's
one factor IQ roughly speaking you if
you if you
take imagine that you you took an IQ
test and you
took it was 100 items long and you took
the 50 items that were the most
correlated with each other and then the
50 items that were the least correlated
with those 50 items so you broke it into
two as much as you could you maximally
differentiated it you might ask well how
correlated would the scores be on those
two different subsets and the answer
would be like 0.
n because there isn't two things that
you're measuring even if you break it up
that way post Haw and say well it's
unfair but we're going to say because
these are the 50 most highly correlated
and these are the leftovers like we're
really capitalizing on chance there
you're still going to get an almost
identical readout from both sections of
the IQ test and it's just not the same
with personality so and so this is this
is Carol's model
basically stratum 3 that's the highest
level of abstraction that's fluid
intelligence and then you can break it
down into these subcategories of
cognitive ability and you might say well
how different are those subcategories
and the answer is not very if you're
high in one you're very likely to be
high in all of them now there's a bit of
a coda to that which is that the lower
your
IQ the higher the correlation between
these sub aspects of intelligence the
lower your IQ the higher the correlation
between the sub aspects of intelligence
as you get up into the higher strata of
IQ your your intelligence differentiates
more across the potential range of
differentiation which is to say there's
one way of not being very
bright but there's multiple ways of
being bright so but even even so if
you're high on one you're still quite
likely to be high on the rest of them so
then the question is what's the
correlation between G and each of these
sub elements of G and then what's the
correlation between the sub elements of
G themselves so if this was PL itic it
and we were looking at openness and
extroversion the correlation here would
be about point I think it's about 0.5
something like that and the correlation
between openness and extraversion would
be about. 3 quite a bit of difference
but with this there's G there's the sub
elements there's the correlation
coefficients 0. n almost
0.95 Point what is that 6 or 8 88 6889
pretty much n pretty much well you can
fractionate it the best you possibly can
doesn't matter it's one thing it's one
thing and it looks like it's the ability
to abstractly represent and then to
manipulate the abstractions I said with
working memory you know you can get it
that simply how many digits can you keep
in your head simultaneously without
dropping one that's it God it's
unbelievable it's pretty straightforward
and then it's this viciously powerful
predictor long-term life success
probably prediction of around 05 now
psychologists okay psychologists hate
this they won't admit that it exists
and I think it's because there's
something about intelligence that rubs
against our intrinsic egalitarianism
right there's two things that do it
first let's say you're successful you
like to think I'm successful you know
and you like to attribute it to your own
doing and fair enough you know I'm not
saying that there isn't an element of it
that's your own doing whatever means but
if your nerve conductive velocity
happens to be high there's a lot more
probability that you're going to be
successful and it's kind of hard to
blame that on you or to attribute it to
you for that matter so it it indicates a
kind of statistical arbitrariness about
the distribution of success and failure
in our society okay so that's one thing
people don't like that idea the second
thing is is that it turns out to be very
difficult to raise IQ now It's Tricky
because it looks like you can raise IQ
across whole populations because at
least fluid intelligence looks like it's
been rising quite substantially over the
last 100 years maybe as people are
better nourished and better educated but
also more prone to continually
manipulate abstractions in their life
because I I mean kids start with
computers when they're like two you know
so but if you take a group of people and
you try to if you take a group of low IQ
people and you try to raise their IQ
it's very very difficult to manage it
without a tremendous amount of
investment that doesn't necessarily mean
the investment isn't worthwhile but it
does mean that it's very
difficult well the best thing to do as
far as we can tell the best thing to do
is get nourishment right that seems to
be the most effective yeah yeah yeah so
part of the reason part of the reason
the theory is part of the reason that
population IQs have been increasing over
the last 100 years is because there's
just no one left who's seriously enough
malnourished so that it's going to
profoundly impact their intellectual
capabilities so breastfeeding seems to
raise IQ so it's two two points three
points with every year of breastfeeding
it's something like that so it's it's
it's and that's actually quite a lot two
or three points actually makes a
difference as it turns out
so okay so so is IQ real depends what
you mean by
real IQ is averaged performance across
averaged sets of questions that require
abstraction to conceive of and and
answer is it
real well it's real statistically and
you can use it to predict important
outcomes that other things can't predict
and from a scientific perspective and
and it's also correlated with various
physiological and biological phenomena
well that's that's how you define real
scientifically so yes it's real are
there other factors that determine
people's success and worth I keep isn't
a measure of people's worth in any
intrinsic sense it's a it's an estimate
of their ability to succeed in AB in
hierarchies that are dependent on the
ability to manipulate complex sets of
information there's lots of other things
about people that differentiate them in
terms of quality and quantity and all of
those things and the the most evident of
those are the big five traits now if
you're a psychologist this is another
thing every psychologist should be
taught if you want
to discover something about human beings
that hasn't already been discovered the
first thing you should do is make sure
it isn't IQ and it isn't any of the big
five traits and psychologists almost
never do that because what happens is
that if they control for IQ so in a
regression you'd say okay here's the
thing I'm interested in predicting the
first thing we're going to do is add IQ
and not a measure that you took in five
minutes either like a real IQ test
because you want to use a good measure
to test your hypothesis against and not
a 10 item measure of the big five either
like a 100 item measure so you get a
reliable measure you throw in IQ you
throw in the big five and then you throw
in your Dopey construct and then you see
if it can predict anything and the
answer is no and so psychologists don't
do it because whenever they do it
properly it destroys their construct and
that makes them irritated because their
claim to their position of authority in
the educational dominance hierarchy is
predicated on the validity of their
construct now if you're a real scientist
what you try to do is destroy destroy
your construct you think okay it looks
like this is real then you think it's
probably not and I don't want to spend
the next 10 years chasing a ghost and a
chimera so I'm going to try to destroy
the damn thing so you say well we'll
match it up against a good measure of IQ
and a comprehensive big five and it
still survives we'll do a couple of
replications to make sure that we can't
kill it any other way and maybe we'll do
the statistics three or four different
ways to make sure that the thing just
doesn't disappear when you use a diff
different statistical procedure and
people don't do that and that's why the
replication rate even among
wellestablished psychological findings
so to speak ones that have been highly
cited is extraordinarily low and if you
talk to psychologists they'll wave their
hands and they'll say well I don't
really believe an IQ it's like okay you
know we're not talking about uh what do
you call those what did the Ghostbusters
hunt down we're not talking about
paranormal phenomena they're not things
you get to believe in or not right
they're rules TOS for defining what
constitutes something that's real from a
scientific perspective and a
psychometric perspective so you don't
get to say well I'll apply one
definition of reality because I don't
like IQ and then I'll use the same
definition to justify my own constructs
like sorry that isn't how it works not
you can do that if you're a
postmodernist you can do that but if
you're a person who actually thinks
scientifically you don't get to play
that game so now you know part of the
reason that we need to know about these
sorts of
things let's see how are we doing for
time here oh yeah we're doing good I
think we need to know these things
partly because they have policy
implications first of all you need to
know them for your own life because you
got to know that there are differences
in intelligence it's really important if
you go into a job and you're not smart
enough for that job you're going to have
one bloody miserable time and you're
going to make life wretched for the
people around you because you won't be
able to handle the position and as you
climb hierarchies of competence the
demand on fluid intelligence increases
and so unless you want to fail you don't
put yourself in over your head well
what's over your head well that's a
tricky thing to figure out I mean you
have to figure that out with
intelligence you have to figure it out
with conscientiousness you have to
figure it out with creativity you have
to figure out with stress tolerance with
agreeableness because you want to go
into a Cooperative environment and not a
competitive one if you're agreeable and
with neuroticism you want probably want
to keep the stress level of your job
relatively low because those are all
places that you can break down and most
people have at least one significant
weakness in their intelligence
personality makeup and you got to be
careful not to place yourself in a
position where that's going to be a
fatal flaw but what you really want to
do as far as I can tell if you want to
maximize your chances for both success
and and let's say well-being is you want
to find a strata of occupation in which
you would have an intelligence that
would put you in the upper cortile
that's perfect then you're a big fish in
a small pond and you don't want to be
this you don't want to be the stupidest
guy in the room it's a bloody rough
place to be so and you probably don't
want to be the smartest guy in the room
either because what that probably means
is you should be in a different room
right you should look at a place where
if you're right at the top it's you've
mastered it it's time to go somewhere
where you're a little lower so that
you've got something to climb up for so
and I can if you're not hyper
conscientious for example you're
probably not going to want a job that
you have to work 70 hours a week at
because you're just not wired up that
way you'd rather have some Leisure and
like more power to you
if that's how you're wired up there's
nothing wrong with having some Leisure
but if you're someone who can't stand
sitting around doing nothing ever then
maybe you can go into a job that's going
to require you to work 75 hours a week
and almost all jobs that are at the top
of complex dominance hierarchies require
very high intelligence and insane levels
of conscientiousness as well generally
speaking as pretty damn high levels of
stress tolerance you know because that
can knock you out too because there's
going to be sharp fluctuations in your
career generally speaking at the higher
levels of a of a of a of a structure and
you have to make very complicated
decisions often with very short time
Horizons so you have to decide if that's
what you
want okay so here's some IQ items so
this is this is from a test roughly it
isn't from the direct test but it's an
analog of the Ravens Progressive
matrices now here's how the Ravens was
derived so imagine that you
have you got your 100 questions and you
can take out the sum of those and call
that IQ okay so now you have a score
then you can do a correlation between
all of the items and that score and you
can find out which single item is the
best predictor of the total score
because you might see that question 39
has no correlation with with the with
the mean with the average you say well
that isn't a very good question you'd
actually throw that out of the next test
but you'd say well item number 15 is
correlated at 75 with the total score so
that's a good single item so then
imagine that you went across sets of IQ
tests and you took out the best single
item predictors of fullscale IQ what
you'd end up with is something like
this so the Ravens Progressive matrices
is a very good test of fluid
intelligence and it's relatively
non-linguistic which is also an
advantage right because imagine you
wanted to assess the intelligence of a
very diverse range of people and they
all came from different linguistic
backgrounds well as long as they can
understand the instructions which are
all almost self-evident then they're
going to be able to do this okay so this
is you see you have to guess in case you
didn't already figure this out which you
would have had you been using your
intelligence and applying it you're
trying to replace the question mark with
one of these and so here's how you do it
roughly speaking it's also a it's
probably a working memory test because
you have to hold a variety of variables
in imagination at the same time okay so
the first thing you say see is every row
has a star a triangle and a square and
each row has a DOT two dots and three
dots and so every row has to have a
triangle square and star and one two or
three dots okay so this one first of all
what's it missing in terms of
shape triangle excellent see that's why
you're at the UFT and then okay and then
what's it missing for dots two dots
excellent so we do a little scan here
and we see oh look well it could be that
one or it could be
that's
it it's that one and so is that right
yes aren't we smart no that was easy so
no you're not very smart if you figure
that one out because pretty much
everybody can figure that one out I
think this next one is more
difficult okay so in the first row you
see that there's two objects each are
different color and they move together
right they join that one they're
separate there they join they're
together they're separate there and they
join there so this one should be halfway
in between those two and the other thing
that happens
is let's see oh this item actually might
be incorrectly represented because the
blue should be on the other side
whatever
um what's
that three yeah
yes did they
flip okay well anyways you see that it's
three see I'm not very bright because
I've just lectured for an hour okay so
so that was a more difficult item and
then this one is more difficult if I
remember correctly
so let's see so they're all three
different colors so that has to be color
then what's the other thing the
relationship between the colors change
so what's the
answer ha you're all you're you're all
scared to answer aren't you cuz you
might be wrong yeah and the the more
anxious people are even less likely to
answer number
three okay so if you want to test
someone's IQ then you put together a
like nice batch of these at different
levels of difficulty and then you sum
them and then you rank order and then
you correct for age and then you have IQ
and that's that and then you can say
well then you can sort people into the
complexity of their occupations and
isn't that dismal and wretched but it's
true so here you you
go this is from the wonderlick people
they're a commercial company that makes
General cognitive ability tests and it's
often used by corporations even though
it's actually illegal it's actually
illegal to use IQ tests but the
wonderlick
doesn't promote themselves as testing IQ
I think they I think it's General
cognitive ability which is the same
thing but whatever the SATs the Gres the
lsats all of those are IQ tests so now
they're more crystallized than fluid
we'll get to that in a minute but
crystallized knowledge is what you acre
across time so you could say that fluid
intelligence is what programs your brain
it fills it with facts let's say it
fills it with knowledge and then but you
can get an estimate of your intelligence
by sampling your domain of factual
knowledge and the reason for that is
that well obviously the better the
programmer the better the content and so
what that also means is that you can you
could if you were prefrontal cortex was
damaged later in life your fluid ey
could plummet but your crystallized IQ
remain more or less intact so even
though they're not different one
produces the other and then once the
producer has produced then the producer
can disappear and you still got the
encoded knowledge so at that least
that's how it looks to me so okay so how
smart do you have to be to be different
things in life well if you have an IQ of
116 to
130 which is 85th percentile and above
so so it's one person in 8 up to one
person in 130 I believe is 85 90 95 is
it 95 I think it's 95 one person eight
to one person in 20 then you can be a
attorney a research analyst an editor an
advertising manager a chemist an
engineer an executive manager Etc that's
that's the now that's not the high-end
for IQ by the way you know that it can
go up well it can go up indefinitely
although there's fewer and fewer people
as it goes up so if you want to be the
best at what you're doing Bar None then
having an IQ of above 145 is a necessity
and maybe you're pushing 160 in some
situations and maybe that's make making
you one person in 10,000 or even one
person in 100,000 and then also to
really be good at it you probably have
to be reasonably stress tolerant and
also somewhat conscientious so you know
people and you think well why is it that
smart people are at the top of dominance
hierarchies and the answer to that in
part is because they get there first
right I mean everything's a race roughly
speaking and the faster you are the more
likely you are to be at the Forefront of
the pack and intelligence in large part
is speed that's not all of it is so if
you're moving towards something
difficult rapidly the faster people are
going to get there first so IQ of 115
110 to 115 so that's 85th to 73rd to
85th percentile copywriter accountant
manager sales manager sales analyst
general manager ping purchasing agent
registered nurse sales account executive
uh if you look at universities the
smartest people are they're Above This
who are the smartest people at
University what do you think mati
mathematicians physicists and
mathematicians right right I could tell
you who's on the other end but I
[Laughter]
won't yeah I'd like to though anyway
anyways okay going down the now 103 to
108 is slightly above average right 60th
to 7 percentile store manager bookkeeper
credit clerk lab tester general sales
telephone sales accounting clerk
computer operator customer service rep
technician clerk typist so you see at
this level people are people have some
technical skill and some ability to deal
with complex things okay that's dead
average 100 is average dispatcher in a
general office police patrol officer
receptionist cashier General clerical
inside sales clerk meter reader printer
teller data entry electrical helper
95th to 98 machinist food department
manager quality control Checker security
guard unskilled labor maintenance arc
welder die Setter mechanic good good IQ
range for relatively qualified trades
people 87 to 93 messenger factory
production worker assembler food service
worker nurses aid warehouseman custodian
janitor material handler Packer now what
you're seeing what you're starting to
see is that as you move down the
hierarchy the jobs get simpler they're
more likely to be assigned by other
people or they're
repetitive because what IQ predicts to
some degree is how rapidly you can learn
something but once you've learned it it
doesn't predict how necessarily how well
you do at it and so the more repetitive
jobs tend people with lower IQs are more
suited to more repetitive jobs under 87
is there something well
no right that's a big problem and it's
something our society has not addressed
at
all jobs for people with IQs of less
than 85 are very very rare so what the
hell are those suppos people supposed to
do it's like one it's 15% of the
population what are they supposed to do
well we better figure it out because one
of the things that's happening too is
that as the as the high IQ Tech Geeks
get a hold of the world the demand for
cognitive power is increasing not
decreasing right you want to be a teller
well you know those checkout machines
they're not so simple you want to work
at McDonald's you think that's a simple
job you don't see robots working at
McDonald's and the reason for that is
that what McDonald's workers do is too
complex for for robots to do
so well so this is a discussion that no
one wants to have but that's okay it's
still a problem and it has to be dealt
with so the US government I think I told
you this at one point already it's
illegal to induct anyone into the US
Army if they have an IQ of less than 83
right it's about 10% of the population
because the US Army and they've been
doing IQ testing since IQ testing began
because they want everybody they can
possibly get into the army because in
peacetime they use it as a way of moving
people up to socioeconomic ladder and in
Wartime well obviously you need as many
soldiers as you can get your hands on
and so you're not going to be any
pickier than you have to be so when the
US Army says it's illegal to induct
anybody into the Armed Forces if they
have an IQ of less than 83 then you know
that they've done it for absolute
necessity right and when people have
made a finding that contradicts what
they want to hear and they're doing it
out of absolute necessity you can be
reasonably true that it's one of those
facts that just won't bloody well go
away and so you might think well if
there's nothing for someone with an IQ
of less than 83 to do in the Army what
makes you think that there's something
that they can do in the general
population and then the issue is you
know because the conservatives will say
well they should just work harder like
sorry that ain't going to fly and the
Liberals will say well there's no
difference between people anyhow and you
can just train people to do everything
and that's wrong so they're both wrong
and they're seriously wrong and the fact
that neither side of the political
perspective will take a good cold hard
look at this problem means that we're
going to increasingly have a structural
problem in our societies because we're
complexifying everything so rapidly that
you can't find employment unless
increasingly unless you're intelligent
you guys are really going to face this
you know lawyers are disappearing like
mad and the reason for that is you can
look it up online increasingly you can
do things yourself if you're smart and
so like the workingclass people have
been wiped out pretty nicely over the
last 30 years by by Automation and
various other things it's the low end of
the white collar class that's coming up
next so I'm not saying that low lawyers
are in the low end but lowend lawyers
are in the low end of the white color
class so there's still going to be
plenty of positions for people who are
creative and fast on their feet and
super smart in fact those people are
going to have all the money that's
already happening to a great degree you
know cuz if you're smart and you can use
a computer you're so smart it's just
absolutely unbelievable right and if you
can't use a computer and lots of people
and I don't mean you know you can open
word that isn't what I mean I mean maybe
I mean you can program and if you can't
program well you're right at the next
end so if you haven't got that with you
you're you're going to be left behind
what's going happen when
a lot of them will take
demoll that's what's happening in the
United States yeah it's a no it yeah so
there's a massive drug problem emerging
in3 yeah no I'm telling you that is
what's happening
there yes
drugs yeah drugs of
abuse
fallet well that what H what is is
happening to a large degree is people
drop out of the employment race they get
very depressed they develop chronic pain
problems especially if they're men
because chronic pain and depression are
very much the same thing and then they
subsist on opiates which are subsidized
by Medicaid in the US I'm not kidding
about this this is exactly what's
happening what what else is going to
happen to people for whom there's
nothing to do they have a terrible time
especially if they're
conscientious that's a good question you
know the AI guys are pushing hard on
this what's the biggest
employment
category
driver think about it what's Tesla doing
what are all the AI guys working on as
fast as they possibly can driverless
cars no problem except that's the
biggest employment category for men so
what are those guys going to
do yeah they're going to sit home and
you know be miserable with their wives
and take opiate because they have
chronic pain problems right nasty and
you might think well could they think up
something else to do well if you have an
IQ of 83 or less you're not going to be
doing a lot of thinking about something
else to do you know that isn't how it
works because you're more of a to to
you're an act person not a thinking
person roughly speaking you know and so
if you have a task at hand especially if
you're conscientious you can diligently
go about it but you know I've tried to
train people with IQs of 80 and less to
do what I would consider tasks that that
that one of you could learn to do in 10
minutes and and never make a mistake
again and it's like tens of hours with
bare minimum Mastery of the tasks so
yeah it's ugly situation no doubt about
it okay
openness so
creativity well I can talk more about
this on on on Thursday maybe we'll just
stop and I'll go into creativity on
Thursday so we've got about 5 minutes so
if anyone has a question I'd be more
than than happy to entertain a question
so did it what I tell you like what you
need we're in a technical area to some
degree right so you need to understand
how these tests come about because you
can't understand the concepts without
understanding it so I'm hoping that the
way I told you that the IQ tests were
derived made sense I mean it's a fairly
straightforward thing but that's what
you want to concentrate on you had a
question y y
you can't change you can't train simple
reaction time it's really
hard you top out very rapidly and here's
but let's take your question a little
further so let's say
um IQ predicts how fast you'll Master a
video
game so then and it does so then let's
say we're going to train the hell out of
you on a video game so you get super
good at it and then you'll get like
Tetris everyone does everyone know what
Tetris is okay well Tetris is really an
i an IQ test for all intents and
purposes it's spatial rotation test so
you can get really good at Tetris right
you think hey my IQ is increasing it's
like well here's the problem let's say I
produce a variant of Tetris that
requires that that that the idea is
basically the same but it requires
different operations being good at
Tetris won't help you be good at that
test you don't get crossover and people
have been trying this for a long time
it's like well maybe you could practice
a bunch of IQ tests and you'd get better
it's like no you get better on the IQ
test you practice ractice but you don't
get better on IQ tests and you
see even fluid you can't move it there
are people who come up with claims all
the time like the Lumosity people it's
like well here's a bunch of complex so
then they thought look practice one test
that doesn't work to make you smarter so
then practice a whole bunch of tests and
then maybe what you learn across all the
tests will make you smarter no it
doesn't work and it really sucks because
one of the things you'd hope is that
once you had extracted out a central
factor for intelligence that you could
get people to practice the micro skills
that were associated with it and it
would boost IQ it's like it doesn't work
and you know about every five years
someone comes out with a claim that says
hey we've developed a new test and if
you just do this test you'll get smarter
and then someone tests it out and they
usually use the Ravens Progressive
matrices as the marker and they show no
it's the same thing domain specific
knowledge doesn't generalize to other
areas so it's a hell of a thing if you
if if you can figure out how to raise
people's fluid IQ you will be a
billionaire but you won't be able to do
it because it looks like it's impossible
but you never know you know you know
maybe someone will crack it at some
point but we certainly haven't yet
so no transfer
no there's no General no no
generalizability of a specific skill to
IQ so you know if you practice one thing
and it there's something that you're
doing that's close to that there's going
to be some generalizability it's kind of
hard to Define what close means
though pro pro well it depends on it
would depend on how big the factor you
changed was but the general rule of
thumb is no transfer
yes oh yeah the higher the higher IQ oh
yeah the higher IQ person will learn
learn the new thing faster pretty much
no matter what it is yes yes but even so
then you might think well what if you
practice learning a bunch of new things
fast would that make you faster at
learning new things and the answer is a
people are doing that all the time so
you're probably maxed out on that to
some degree and B no it won't so and it
believe me people have tried this for a
long time so and for for good reason and
we haven't got anywhere
yes yep
yeah the language one is tougher because
like if you say say you learn two
languages can you pick up the third
faster and well the answer is how it
depends on how linguistically close this
the new language is to the two that
you've already learned and then if you
learn 30 you can probably learn a new
one in like two days because once you've
learned 30 you've covered the domain of
languages so the language issue is a
little bit more complex because
languages have a fair bit of commonality
in their underlying structure so but you
don't learn one language faster after
you've learned three because you've got
smarter you learn one language faster
after you've learned three because you
know more about languages so okay we
should stop we'll see you Thursday